in the midst of the escalation in Syria
and enroute to the g20 summit in Saint
Petersburg Russia President Obama is
making a stop in Stockholm Sweden many
are asking why why Sweden to understand
that it's important to have an
appreciation for really how Sweden has
changed and how that makes the agenda
quite important for the President's
agenda today most Americans still think
of Sweden and the terms of the past of
Sweden a neutral Sweden a socialist
Sweden they in fact have missed the
quiet revolution that's taken place in
the country both in terms of economic
and security policy first on the
economic front
Swedish leaders looked over the
precipice during a banking crisis in
1992 and they responded to that economic
crisis by implementing major structural
reforms they took action to essentially
forge a new Nordic model one promised on
competition fiscal responsibility
innovation openness transparency good
governance such that when this economic
crisis the eurozone crisis hit the
Swedes have managed us quite well
weathering the crisis with some of the
lowest unemployment rates and some of
the highest growth rates on the European
continent over the past years but at the
same time Sweden had a parallel
evolution in its security policy merging
from a Cold War neutrality to become one
of NATO's and indeed the United States
as closest defense and security actors
we've seen this in action as Sweden has
deployed fighter aircraft and the
operation over the Libyan skies but also
as Sweden participated heavily with
troops in Afghanistan NATO operations
both in Afghanistan and the Balkans
Sweden brings one of the most serious
Air Force's to the NATO alliance when it
partners with the Alliance on these
operations so in fact President Obama is
visiting what in many respects is a New
Sweden Sweden that's now a significant
player along with its Nordic neighbours
on issues of global concern